i
Statement
of the
St. John’s
College
Program
ii
Annapolis, Maryland
Santa Fe, New Mexico
sjc.edu
Founded as King William’s School in 1696 and chartered as 
St. John’s College in 1784, the college is co-educational and 
has no religious affiliation. St. John’s College does not discriminate 
on the basis of race, sex, color, national or ethnic origin, age, 
religion, disability, marital status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity and expression, genetic information, or other legally 
protected classification in the administration of any of its 
programs and activities or with respect to admission or 
employment. Academic facilities and most residence halls 
are accessible to persons with physical disabilities. 
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2 Introduction
4 Seminar
5 Preceptorial
5 Tutorials
11 Laboratory
13 Formal Lecture
15 St. John’s List of Great Books 
18 The List of Authors by Subject Matter
20 Tutors
21 Schedules
22 Essays and Examinations
22 Academic Standing
24 Degree of Bachelor of Arts
25 Graduate Institute in Liberal Education
25 Degree of Master of Arts in Liberal Arts
28 Degree of Master of Arts in Eastern Classics
2
INTRODUCTION
St. John’s College is a community 
dedicated to liberal education. Liberally 
educated persons, the college believes, 
acquire a lifelong commitment to the 
pursuit of fundamental knowledge and 
to the search for unifying ideas. They are 
intelligently and critically appreciative of 
their common heritage and conscious of 
their social and moral obligations. They 
are well-equipped to master the specific 
skills of any calling, and they possess the 
means and the will to become free and 
responsible citizens.
St. John’s College is persuaded that a 
genuine liberal education requires the 
study of great books—texts of words, 
symbols, notes, and pictures—because 
they are both timeless and timely. 
These books are the most important 
teachers. They illuminate the persisting 
questions of human existence and they 
bear directly on the problems we face 
today. They express most originally, and 
often most perfectly, the ideas by which 
contemporary life is knowingly or 
unknowingly governed. Their authors 
can speak to us almost as freshly as 
when they spoke for the first time, for 
what they have to tell us is not of merely 
academic concern, nor is it remote from 
our true interests. They change our 
minds, move our hearts, and touch our 
spirits.
The books speak to us in more than one 
way. In raising the persisting human 
questions, they lend themselves to 
different interpretations that reveal a 
variety of independent and yet comple-
mentary meanings. And while seeking 
the truth, they please us as works of art 
with a clarity and a beauty that reflect 
their intrinsic intelligibility. They are, 
therefore, properly called great, whether 
they are epic poems or political treatises, 
and whether their subject matter is 
scientific, historical, or philosophical. 
They are also linked together, for each of 
them is introduced, supported, or crit-
icized by the others. In that sense they 
converse with each other, and they draw 
the readers to take part, within the limits 
of their abilities, in a large and continu-
ing conversation.
This conversation, however, is unavoid-
ably one-sided. The books can only 
repeat what they have to say, without 
furnishing the clarifications that we 
desire. To overcome this limitation is 
the goal of the St. John’s seminar. Here 
a number of students of varied back-
grounds, faced with a text that may 
present unfamiliar thoughts, attempt 
to discuss it reasonably. It is presup-
posed that the students are willing to 
submit their opinions to one another’s 
questions. The demands of the indi-
vidual and those of the group are in 
continuous interplay, setting limits 
within which the discussion moves 
with the utmost possible freedom. The 
discussion may concern itself primarily 
with trying to establish the meaning of 
a poem or the validity of an argument. 
It may concern itself with more general 
or with very contemporary questions 
that thrust themselves forward. The 
students bring to the seminar the as-
sumptions they have derived from their 
experience in the contemporary world. 
Through discussion they acquire a new 
perspective, which enables them to rec-
ognize both the sameness of a recurrent 
problem and the variety of its historical 
manifestations.
Principally, however, the aim is to  
ascertain not how things were, but  
how things are—to help students gain 
understanding and make reasonable 
decisions in whatever circumstances 
they face. And it is the ultimate aim of 
the Program that the habits of thought 
3
and discussion thus begun by the 
students should continue with them 
throughout their lives.
Most of the teaching at St. John’s takes 
the form of a discussion. The conver-
sational methods of the seminar are 
carried over into other classes. As much 
as possible, the actual instruction in all 
seminars, tutorials, and laboratories 
is made to depend on the activity and 
initiative of the students. The tutors 
function as guides, more intent on  
listening to the students and working 
with them than imposing upon them 
their own understandings.
St. John’s seeks to restore the true 
meaning of liberal education. The 
primary function of the liberal arts has 
always been to bring about an aware-
ness of the forms that are embodied in 
combinations of words and in numbers 
so that they become means of under-
standing. Traditionally, the liberal 
arts were seven in number: grammar, 
rhetoric, logic—the arts of language; 
and arithmetic, geometry, music, and 
astronomy—the arts of mathematics. In 
more contemporary terms, the liberal 
arts bring to light what is involved in the 
use of words and numbers in all kinds of 
discursive thought, in analyzing, speak-
ing, and writing; and also in measuring, 
deducing, and demonstrating.
There are many ways to develop these 
arts. The curriculum emphasizes six  
of them: discussion, translation, writing, 
experimentation, mathematical demon-
stration, and musical analysis. They 
all serve the same end: to invite the 
students to think freely and critically  
for themselves. By these means,  
students will be able to envisage actual 
situations, to deliberate by articulating 
clear alternatives with the hope of arriv-
ing at a proper choice. The acquisition 
of these intellectual skills will serve 
the students who have learned them 
throughout their lives.
Knowledge advances and the fun-
damental outlook of humanity may 
change over the centuries, but these 
arts of understanding remain in one 
form or another indispensable. These 
arts enable all human beings to know 
the world around them and to know 
themselves in this world, and to use 
that knowledge with wisdom. Under 
the guidance of these arts, they can 
free themselves from the constraint of 
prejudice and the narrowness of beaten 
paths. Under their discipline, they can 
acquire the habit of listening to reason. 
A genuinely conceived liberal arts cur-
riculum cannot avoid aiming at these 
most far-reaching of all human goals.
The aim of the education offered by  
St. John’s College is the liberation of the 
human intellect. This is an education 
for all, regardless of a person’s race, sex, 
national or ethnic origin, age, reli-
gion, disability, marital status, sexual 
orientation, or gender identity and 
expression. By reading great books and 
struggling together with the fundamen-
tal questions that they raise, students 
and their teachers learn from their 
differences and discover more deeply 
their shared humanity. In this and other 
ways, a diversity of background and 
experience enriches our community of 
learning. Because it offers an education 
for all, St. John’s College has sought and 
continues to seek to make its program 
of study known and available to people 
of diverse backgrounds.
4
THE CURRICULUM
The Seminar
The heart of the curriculum is the 
seminar—a discussion of assigned 
readings from the books of the Program. 
In each seminar, 17 to 21 students 
work with two members of the faculty 
who serve as leaders. The group meets 
twice a week, on Monday and Thursday 
evenings, for two hours—sometimes 
longer if the topic under discussion 
has aroused a sustained and lively 
conversation. The assignment for 
each seminar amounts, on average, to 
around 80 pages of reading, but may be 
much shorter if the text happens to be 
particularly difficult.
The seminar begins with a question 
asked by one of the leaders. Thereafter 
the seminar consists mostly of student 
discussion. Students talk with one 
another, not just to the leaders. They do 
not raise their hands for permission to 
be heard, but enter the discussion or 
withdraw from it at will. The resulting 
informality is tempered by the use of 
formal modes of address.
Once underway, the seminar may take 
many forms. It may range from the most 
particular to the most general. The read-
ing of Thucydides, for example, is almost 
certain to elicit a discussion of war and 
aggression and to bring to the surface 
the students’ opinions and fears about 
the wisdom or error of national policies. 
Homer and Dante prompt reflections 
on human virtues and vices and on 
humanity’s ultimate fate. Sometimes 
a seminar will devote all its time to an 
interpretation of the assigned reading, 
staying close to the text; at other times 
the talk may range widely over topics 
suggested by the reading, but bear only 
indirectly on the text itself in the minds 
of the participants. After seminar,  
students from different groups compare 
the points made in their discussions.
Except for the requirements of com-
mon courtesy, there are only two rules: 
First, all opinions must be heard and 
explored, however sharply they may 
clash; second, every opinion must be 
supported by argument—an unsupport-
ed opinion does not count. In a fresh-
man seminar, the students may tend to 
express their opinions with little regard 
for their relevance to the question or 
their relation to the opinions of others. 
Gradually, in their interplay with one 
another, the students learn to proceed 
with care, keeping to the topic and 
trying to uncover the meanings of the 
terms they use. They learn that to some 
extent the procedure of the seminar 
varies with the kind of reading under 
study; poetry is not philosophy, and it 
can require a different approach. Such 
progress in learning together may be 
crowned by sudden insights on the part 
of a few of the seminar members, or by 
occasions when the seminar as a whole 
achieves illumination.
The course of the discussion cannot 
be fixed in advance; it is determined 
rather by the necessity of following the 
argument, of facing the crucial issues, 
or of seeking foundations upon which a 
train of reasoning can be pursued. The 
argument does not necessarily lead to 
the answer to a question. More often 
than not, the question remains open 
but with certain alternatives clearly 
outlined. The progress of the seminar is 
not particularly smooth; the discussion 
may sometimes branch off and entan-
gle itself in irrelevant difficulties. Only 
gradually can the logical rigor of an ar-
gument emerge within the sequence of 
analogies and other imaginative devices 
by which the discussion is kept alive.  
A seminar may also degenerate into 
5
rather empty talk, without being able 
for some time to extricate itself from 
such a course. At its best, the seminar 
may reach insights far beyond the ini-
tial views held by any of its members.
Under these circumstances, the primary 
role of the leaders is not to give infor-
mation, nor is it to produce the “right” 
opinion or interpretation. It is to guide 
the discussion, to keep it moving, to 
raise objections, and to help the students 
in every way possible to understand the 
author, the issues, and themselves. The 
most useful instrument for this purpose 
is the question. Perhaps the most useful 
device of all is the question “Why?”—but 
the leaders may also take a definite and 
positive stand and enter directly into the 
argument. 
If they do so, however, they can expect 
no special consideration. Reason is the 
only recognized authority. Consequent-
ly, all opinions must be defended with 
reason, and any single opinion can pre-
vail only by general consent. The aim is 
always to develop the students’ powers 
of reason and understanding and to 
help them arrive at intelligent opinions 
of their own.
Every freshman, sophomore, and 
junior submits an essay on some theme 
suggested by the seminar readings. In 
Santa Fe, an essay is submitted each 
semester; in Annapolis, each year. The 
essay is not a research paper with 
extensive footnotes and a bibliography, 
but rather an attempt on the part of 
the students to set out in writing, as 
clearly as they can, their own thoughts 
on some aspect of the liberal arts. The 
essay in the second semester becomes 
the center of their final oral examina-
tions. For sophomores, the annual essay 
holds a position of special importance: 
It becomes a major part of the process 
called enabling (see page 23).
The Preceptorial
For seven to eight weeks at the end of 
the first semester, seminars of the ju-
nior and senior classes are replaced by 
preceptorials. These are small groups 
of students engaged in the study of one 
book or in exploration of one subject 
through several books. Students are 
usually given a choice of 20 to 25 pre-
ceptorials on books or subjects of par-
ticular interest to the tutors who offer 
them. Students may suggest a topic and 
invite a tutor to study it with them.
Although many preceptorials study 
one of the books of the seminar list or a 
theme suggested by the Program, other 
preceptorials may deal with books and 
themes the students would not other-
wise encounter. There are generally not 
more than 10 students in a preceptorial. 
Guided by a tutor, they proceed at a 
pace more leisurely than that permitted 
by the seminar. Usually, the students’ 
work is completed by some form of 
written work, either a formal paper or a 
presentation to the class.
Listed on the following page are some of 
the preceptorial subjects offered on the 
two campuses in recent years.
THE TUTORIALS
The seminar cannot suffice as the only 
setting for liberal education. By its very 
nature, the seminar does not give the 
student an opportunity to cultivate the 
habits of methodical and careful study 
and of persistently precise discussion 
and writing. Other learning experiences 
must therefore support it; these are 
the tutorials in language, mathematics, 
and music. For each of the four years, 
a student attends one language and 
one mathematics tutorial three times a 
week. Sophomores also attend a music 
tutorial.
6
In the tutorials, seated around a table,  
15 to 16 students study and learn  
together under the direct guidance and  
instruction of a tutor. The tutorial  
provides conditions for a small group  
(on average 15 to 16 students study ) to 
work together toward a careful analysis, 
often through translation or demon-
stration, of an important work. As in 
the seminar, students talk freely with 
one another and with the tutor, but the 
discussion focuses sharply on assigned 
tasks. There are opportunities for all 
students to contribute their measure of 
instruction and insight to one another. 
Other tutors occasionally attend, seeking 
to learn about a particular subject that 
they may later teach.
Writing is assigned regularly in all  
classes—mathematics, music, and lab-
oratory sections, as well as in language 
tutorials. The students are thus called 
upon continually to articulate and orga-
nize their thinking in both the written 
and spoken forms.
The Language T utorial
Specialization in higher education has 
led to a profound neglect of language 
skills. As country is separated from 
country by the barrier of language, so 
profession is separated from profes-
sion by technical jargon. Primarily, the 
language tutorial attempts to remedy 
this condition by training in the means 
of precise communication. In a broad 
sense, it may be thought of as a pres-
ent-day restoration of the traditional 
studies of grammar, rhetoric, and logic. 
The tutorial seeks to foster an intelligent 
and active grasp of the relations between 
language on the one hand and thought 
and imagination on the other. To do this, 
it must direct attention to fundamental 
Homer The Odyssey
Thucydides The Peloponnesian War
Plato The Republic
The Epic of Gilgamesh and related Near Eastern Literature
Jeremiah and Job
Ovid Metamorphosis
Augustine Confessions
Thomas Aquinas Treatise on the Divine Nature
Ibn Khaldun Introduction to History
Shakespeare Measure for Measure and The Taming of the Shrew
Theory of Color  Aristotle , da Vinci, Newton, Goethe, and Edwin Land
Mozart The Marriage of Figaro
Kant Critique of Practical Reason
Austen Mansfield Park
Brontē	 Jane Eyre
Tolstoy Anna Karenina
Woolf Mrs. Dalloway,  A Room of One’s Own
Arendt The Origins of Totalitarianism
Neo-Realism Visconti, Rosel lini, De Sica, De Santis, and James Monaco
Levinas Totality and Infinity
Konrad Lorenz Studies in Animal and Human Behavior
Morrison Beloved Trilogy: Beloved, Jazz, Paradise 
PRECEPTORIAL SUBJECTS
7
ways in which words can be put togeth-
er; to the modes of signifying things; to 
the varied connotations and ambigu-
ities of terms; to the role of metaphors, 
analogies, and images; and to the logical 
relations that connect propositions. 
The study of foreign languages (Greek 
in the first and second years; French 
in the third and fourth years) provides 
an effective means to these ends. By 
studying these languages, by translating 
from them into English, and by com-
paring them with each other and with 
English, the students learn something of 
the nature of languages in general and of 
their own in particular. During the four 
years, then, they study language as the 
discourse of reason, as the articulation  
of experience, and as the medium of 
the art of poetry; and both directly and 
indirectly, through the intermediary of 
foreign tongues, they study their own 
language. They discover the resources of 
articulate speech and learn the rules that 
must govern it if it is to be clear, consis-
tent, and effective—if it is to be adequate 
and persuasive.
In the beginning, the emphasis is on 
the forms of words, the grammatical 
constructions, and the vocabulary of 
each language being studied. Thus the 
rapid reading for the seminar, with its 
attention to the large outlines and to the 
general trend and development of the 
central idea, is supplemented and  
corrected by a more precise and  
analytical study, one that is concerned 
with particular details and shades of 
meaning and with the abstract logical 
structure and rhetorical pattern of a  
given work. Those are matters that do 
not come directly into seminar discus-
sions. The students’ concern with them 
in the language tutorial improves all 
their reading, deepens and enriches  
 
their understanding, and increases their 
ability to think clearly and to speak well.
A secondary purpose of the language 
tutorial is support of the seminar. Some 
of the works read for seminar are also 
studied in the tutorial, free from the veil 
of ready-made translation. Issues are 
brought to the fore that might otherwise 
have been neglected, and they can be 
discussed with greater precision than 
the seminar usually permits. This habit 
of precision, in its turn, can then  
become more common in seminar.
The language tutorial cannot and 
should not aim at mastery of the foreign 
language, but the students can reason-
ably expect to obtain a knowledge of 
grammatical forms and a grasp of the 
peculiar qualities of the languages that 
they study. To experience the individ-
uality of another language is to extend 
the boundaries of one’s sensibility.
The choice of foreign languages is in 
part dictated by the seminar reading 
schedule and is in part arbitrary. Latin 
and German might be used without 
changing the pattern and aims of the 
tutorial. The first year of Greek, howev-
er, goes well with the freshman seminar 
and mathematics tutorial, and the con-
tinuance of Greek into the second year 
advances the work of the first. The first 
year concludes with the study in Greek 
of Plato’s Meno, a dialogue that prompts 
us to think about the nature of learning. 
In the second year, a play of Sophocles 
is translated—for example, Antigone—or 
a book from the Odyssey or Iliad. The 
second year ends with analysis and 
discussion of works by Shakespeare, 
Donne, and other English poets. 
The third year begins with a brief,  
intensive study of French grammar  
followed by the reading of a French text.  
 
8
The aim here is economical progress 
toward facility in the reading of simple 
French. Then follows examination of 
the form and content of French prose 
selections. Discussions of both form 
and content are related to appropriate 
writing assignments, including exercis-
es in translation in which the students 
attempt to match in their own tongue 
the excellence of their models. In the 
second semester a play is read—usually 
Racine’s Phèdre.
The principal activity of the fourth year 
is the reading of French prose and  
poetry, including a number of poems 
from Baudelaire’s Les Fleurs du Mal. Its 
immediate object is the understand-
ing and enjoyment of each poem in its 
parts and as a whole. It also provides a 
substantial basis for discussion of the 
art of poetry and clarification of the re-
lation of that art to the traditional liber-
al arts of language. Writing assignments 
include exercises in translation more 
ambitious than those attempted in the 
third year. The year ends with analysis 
and discussion of modern poets and 
fiction writers in English, such as  
Emily Dickinson, T. S. Eliot, W. B. Yeats, 
Elizabeth Bishop, Wallace Stevens,  
William Faulkner, Flannery O’Connor, 
and Virginia Woolf.
The Mathematics T utorial
Mathematics is a vital part of education; 
that this is true or ought to be is sug-
gested by the word itself, for it is derived 
from a Greek word meaning “to learn.” It 
is regrettable, then, that students should 
come to dislike mathematics or to think 
of themselves as unmathematical. It 
is equally regrettable that competent 
mathematicians are often unaware of 
the philosophical assumptions upon 
which mathematical equations and 
formulas are based. Mathematics at St. 
John’s is studied as a liberal art, not arti-
ficially separated from what have come 
to be called the humanities. When math-
ematics is taught at an unhurried pace, 
in an atmosphere of reflective inquiry, 
and from treatises chosen not only for 
their matter but also for their elegance 
and imagination, as it is at St. John’s, 
mathematics becomes not only the most 
readily learnable liberal art but also one 
that provides ready access to others and 
significant analogies with them.
There are two main reasons for study-
ing mathematics. First, it pervades our 
modern world, perhaps even defines 
it. Therefore, anyone who means to 
criticize or reform, to resist or cooperate, 
with this world not only must have  
some familiarity with the mathemat-
ical methods by which it is managed, 
but also must have thought about the 
assumptions that underlie their appli-
cation. It is the task of the mathematics 
tutorial and the laboratory together to 
help students to think about what it 
means to count and measure things in 
the universe.
The second main reason for studying 
mathematics concerns the mathemat-
ics tutorial more specifically. Since 
mathematics has, as its name implies, a 
particularly close connection with the 
human capacity for learning, its study 
is especially useful in helping students 
to think about what it means to come to 
know something.
To prepare themselves for such reflec-
tion, students study artfully composed 
mathematical treatises, demonstrate 
propositions at the blackboard, and 
solve problems. By doing this over four 
years, they learn a good deal of mathe-
matics and they gain noticeably in rigor 
of thought, nimbleness of imagination, 
and elegance of expression. But while 
they are practicing the art of mathemat-
ics in all its rigor, they are continually 
9
encouraged to reflect on their own 
activity. Scores of questions, of which 
the following are examples, are raised 
during the four years:
Why and how do mathematical proofs 
carry such conviction? What is a 
mathematical system and what are its 
proper beginnings and ends? What is 
the relation of logic to mathematics? 
What do “better” and “worse,” “ugly” 
and “beautiful” signify in mathematics? 
Do mathematical symbols constitute 
a language? Are there “mathematical 
objects”? How might the discoverer of a 
particular theorem have come to see it?
By means of such questions, which 
grow out of the daily work and which ex-
cite the intellect and the imagination at 
the same time, a discussion is initiated 
in the mathematics tutorial that is easi-
ly and often carried over into the larger 
sphere of the seminar.
The students begin with the Elements of 
Euclid. Using Euclid’s organization of 
the mathematical discoveries of his pre-
decessors, the students gain a notion of 
deductive science and of a mathemati-
cal system in general; they  
become acquainted with one view of 
mathematical objects—its central  
expression found in the theory of  
ratios—which is buried under the  
foundations of modern mathematics. 
After Euclid, they begin the study of 
Ptolemy’s Almagest, centering their 
attention on the problem of “hypothe-
ses” constructed to “save the appear-
ances” in the heavens. That the tutorial 
reads Ptolemy indicates the difference 
between the mathematics tutorial at 
St. John’s and the ordinary course 
in mathematics. Ptolemy presents a 
mathematical theory of the heavenly 
motions, but he gives more than that: 
His work is both an example of math-
ematics applied to phenomena and a 
companion to the philosophical, poetic, 
and religious readings that are taken up 
in the first and second years.
In the second year, the students contin-
ue the study of Ptolemy, with emphasis 
upon those difficulties and complexi-
ties of the geocentric system that are 
brilliantly transformed by the Coperni-
can revolution. They study Copernicus’ 
transformation of the Ptolemaic theory 
into heliocentric form. They next take 
up the Conics of Apollonius to learn 
a synthetic presentation of the very 
objects whose analytical treatment by 
Descartes marks the beginning of mod-
ern mathematics. After this, they study 
analytic geometry, which presents the 
conic sections in algebraic form. They 
thus gain an understanding of algebra 
as the “analytic art” in general.
In the third year, students study 
calculus analytically in its modern 
form, originally in Leibniz’s work, and 
geometrically as Newton presented 
it in his Principia Mathematica. In the 
second semester, students take up 
Newton’s treatment of astronomy in the 
Principia, in which he brings heavenly 
and earthly motions under one law and 
replaces a purely geometric astronomy 
with a “dynamic” theory in which orbits 
are determined by laws of force. The 
year concludes with an examination of 
Dedekind’s theory of real numbers, the 
endeavor to provide a rigorous arith-
metical foundation for the calculus. The 
mathematics tutorial is both an intro-
duction to physics and a foundation for 
the study of the philosophical outlook of 
the modern world.
In the fourth year, the reading of  
Lobachevski’s approach to non- 
Euclidean geometry invites reflection 
on the postulates of geometry, as well 
as on the nature of the geometric art, 
its connection to experience, and its 
10
demonstrative character. More than in 
other years, students invent their own 
demonstrations. Comparison of the  
Euclidean and non-Euclidean  
geometries leads to consideration of  
the consistency of mathematical  
systems generally, and finally to a  
study of Gödel’s incompleteness  
theorem. Seniors also study Einstein’s 
special theory of relativity. Beginning 
from Maxwell’s account of light as an  
electromagnetic wave (studied in the 
laboratory), Einstein shows that each 
observer has his own time and space, 
subject to definite mathematical rela-
tions. This demonstration brings into 
question our conventional understand-
ing of time and space. 
The Music T utorial
One of the aims of the St. John’s Program 
has been to restore music as part of 
the liberal arts curriculum. The study 
of music at St. John’s is not directed 
toward performance, but toward an un-
derstanding of the phenomena of music. 
The ancients accorded music a place 
among the liberal arts because they 
understood it as one of the essential 
functions of the mind, associated with 
the mind’s power to grasp number and 
measure. The liberal art of music was 
based, for them, on the ratios among 
whole numbers.
In particular, the music program at  
St. John’s aims at the understanding of 
music through close study of musical 
theory and analysis of works of musical 
literature. In the freshman year, stu-
dents meet once a week to study the 
fundamentals of melody and its notation. 
Demonstration takes place primarily 
by singing, and by the second semester 
the students perform some of the great 
choral works. In the sophomore year, 
a tutorial meets three times a week. 
Besides continuing the singing, the 
music tutorial reflects two different but 
complementary aspects of music. On the 
one hand, music is intimately related to 
language, rhetoric, and poetry. On the 
other, it is a unique and self-sufficient art 
that has its roots deep in nature.
The work of the tutorial includes an 
investigation of rhythm in words as well 
as in notes, a thorough investigation of 
the diatonic system, a study of the ratios 
of musical intervals, and a consideration 
of melody, counterpoint, and harmony. 
None of these are done apart from the 
sounding reality of good music. The  
inventions of Bach, the songs of 
Schubert, the masses of Palestrina, the 
St. Matthew Passion of Bach, the operas of 
Mozart, and the instrumental works of 
Beethoven are the real teachers. In the 
second semester, at least one major work 
is analyzed closely.
Seminars on great works of music  
are included as part of the regular 
seminar schedule. Instead of reading a 
text, students listen to recordings of a 
composition and familiarize themselves 
with its score before the seminar meets. 
Group discussion of a work of music, as 
of a book, facilitates and enriches the 
understanding of it.
THE LABORATORY
Three hundred years ago, algebra and 
the arts of analytic geometry were  
introduced into European thought, 
mainly by René Descartes. This was one 
of the great intellectual revolutions in  
recorded history, paralleling and in part 
determining the other great revolutions 
in industry, politics, morals, and religion. 
It has redefined and transformed our 
whole natural and cultural world. It is 
a focal point of the St. John’s Program 
and one that the college takes special 
care to emphasize. There is scarcely 
11
an item in the curriculum that does not 
bear upon it. The last two years of the  
Program exhibit the far-reaching  
changes that flow from it, and these 
could not be appreciated without the 
first two years, which cover the period 
from Homer to Descartes.
Modern mathematics has made possible 
the exploration of natural phenomena 
on an immense scale and has provided 
the basis for what is known to us as the 
laboratory. The intellectual tools of the 
laboratory are the consequence of the 
vast project of study conceived by the 
great thinkers of the 17th century. They 
are based on a mathematical interpre-
tation of the universe, which transforms 
the universe into a great book written in 
mathematical characters.
St. John’s has a three-year laboratory in 
the natural sciences. In the laboratory, 
students pursue characteristic and  
related topics in physics, biology, and 
chemistry.  The art of measurement 
involves the analytical study of the  
instruments of observation and  
measurement; in practica, students 
reproduce crucial experiments; and, 
throughout, the interplay of hypothesis, 
theory, and fact has to be carefully  
scrutinized. All of this is supported by  
the mathematics tutorials, which provide 
the necessary understanding of mathe-
matical techniques.
The task, however, is not to cover exhaus-
tively the various scientific disciplines, 
to bring the student up-to-date in them, 
or to engage in specialized research. It 
is rather to make the student experi-
ence and understand the significance of 
science as a human enterprise involving 
fundamental assumptions and a variety 
of skills. The college does not subscribe 
to the sharp separation of scientific 
studies from the humanities, as if they 
were distinct and autonomous domains 
of learning. Different fields of explo-
ration require different methods and 
techniques, but the integrity of scientific 
pursuits stems from sources common to 
all intellectual life.
The Organization of  
the Laboratory Work
The laboratory program is largely 
determined by three considerations 
relevant to the liberalization of the study 
of science: (1) The formally scheduled 
experimental work must be combined 
with a full and free discussion of the  
instruments and principles involved in 
it. (2) The content of the work should be 
so chosen as to enable the students to 
trace a scientific discipline to its roots  
in principle, assumption, and observa-
tion—thus certain integrated wholes  
of subject matters are selected as  
problems in which the roles of theory 
and experimentation can be distin-
guished through critical study. (3) The 
schedule of laboratory work should give 
opportunity for leisurely but intensive 
experimentation. The students must 
have time to satisfy themselves as to 
the degree of accuracy their instru-
ments permit, to analyze procedures for 
sources of error, to consider alternative 
methods, and on occasion to repeat an 
entire experiment. Only thus can they 
come to a mature understanding of the 
sciences called “exact.”
A laboratory section consists of 15 to  
16 students working under the guidance 
of a tutor, with the help of more advanced 
students serving as assistants. Sections 
meet two or three times a week. A  
laboratory session may be used for 
exposition and discussion of theory, for 
experimentation, or for both, as the 
progress of the work requires. In most 
cases, the basis for discussion is a classic 
paper or other text directly related to the 
topic at hand; writings of Aristotle, Galen, 
12
Harvey, Huygens, Newton, Lavoisier, 
Maxwell, Thomson, Rutherford, and 
Bohr are among those regularly used in 
this way. In all the work of the laboratory 
and in the laboratory manuals written at 
the college, the purpose is to achieve an 
intimate mixture of critical discussion 
and empirical inquiry.
Laboratory T opics 
The general topics of study have been 
chosen from elementary physical and 
biological sciences. The sequence of 
study may be outlined as follows:
THE FIRST YEAR 
The laboratory begins with 12 weeks 
devoted to topics in observational biol-
ogy: classification of types, anatomical 
structure, cells and their aggregation 
and differentiation, and embryolog-
ical development. Close observation 
by the naked eye or with microscopes 
is accompanied by constant theoret-
ical interpretation, based on reading 
important works of biological scientists. 
Here the student confronts organisms as 
self-moving entities with properties of 
wholeness, intimately dependent on, yet 
distinct from, the surrounding world.
The freshman laboratory next turns 
to the nonliving in a search for funda-
mental laws. Archimedes on the lever 
and on hydrostatics is studied, then the 
laws of equilibrium of gases, tempera-
ture, and calorimetry are taken up, 
experimentally and in discussion of 
the relevant theories. These topics lead 
into an examination of the phenomena, 
largely chemical, and the arguments 
that are involved in the theory that 
matter is composed of discrete parti-
cles. The student compares the views of 
Aristotle and Lavoisier on the nature of 
substance and substantial change, and 
goes on to study and discuss important 
original texts bearing on the develop-
ment of the atomic-molecular theory. 
Experiments are performed to help 
with the understanding of the texts and 
the physical and chemical transforma-
tion of which they speak. The year’s 
work culminates in the resolution of the 
problem of determining atomic weights 
and in an examination of some conse-
quences of this determination.
THE THIRD YEAR 
The third-year laboratory deals with 
topics common to a number of the  
traditional divisions of physics, such 
as mechanics, optics, and electromag-
netism. Throughout the year, exper-
imentation is accompanied by the 
reading of important original writings  
by Galileo, Descartes, Huygens,  
Newton, Leibniz, Faraday, and Maxwell. 
The mathematical tools of physics are 
to be put to work in the laboratory at the 
same time that their rigorous develop-
ment is pursued in the mathematics 
tutorials. As the tools of the calculus  
become available, the emphasis shifts 
from a direct, qualitative description of 
force, acceleration, work, energy, and 
potential fields to their reformulation in 
terms of derivative and integral; at the 
same time, the physical concepts serve 
to illustrate the mathematical ideas. The 
concepts of mechanics are to be used to 
formulate alternative theories of light—
corpuscular and wave—and the success 
of either theory in accounting for optical 
phenomena is examined. The funda-
mental phenomena of electricity and 
magnetism are studied observationally 
and experimentally, and formulated in 
mathematical terms. The final and cul-
minating topic of the year is Maxwell’s 
derivation of an electromagnetic theory 
of light.
THE FOURTH YEAR 
In many ways, the work of the senior year 
is a return to questions the students first 
confronted as freshmen. During the first 
13
semester, the senior laboratory poses 
the question of the atomic composition 
of matter anew, but now with the theory 
of electricity as its guiding thread. Sci-
entists quickly learned that the nature of 
the electron and its interaction with light 
could not be satisfactorily accounted 
for under the assumptions of classical 
physics. Through a sequence of papers 
by Bohr, Einstein, Schrödinger, and 
Heisenberg, with related experiments, 
students explore in detail the develop-
ment of the quantum hypothesis—which 
challenges classical ideas about not only 
the nature of matter, but also the power 
and the scope of scientific explanation. 
The laboratory program ends as it 
began—with a study of living organ-
isms. In the spring of the senior year, 
students finally confront the evidence 
and arguments for their modern views 
of evolution and genetics. The semester 
begins with Darwin and Mendel,  
proceeds to a synthesis, and then traces 
developments in cellular and molecular 
biology that are thought to undergird 
this synthesis, as presented in seminal 
papers by 20th century biologists. In  
addition, this work raises questions 
about whether there is purpose in nature, 
whether there are natural kinds, what 
distinguishes living from non-living, and 
whether living things have a wholeness—
and if so, what is responsible for it.
THE FORMAL LECTURE
The curriculum as described so far calls 
for student participation at every active 
stage of the work. On Friday evenings, 
however, a different form of instruction 
occurs. The formal lecture is the  
occasion when the students have an  
opportunity to listen steadily and 
attentively. The subject may be closely 
connected with seminar, tutorial, or 
laboratory readings, or it may open  
up a new field of interest and test the 
students’ readiness to absorb new  
information and to follow arguments in 
unfamiliar fields such as anthropology 
or space science, painting or architec-
ture. The lecturers are often visiting 
scholars, but not infrequently they are 
members of the St. John’s faculty. Vis-
itors may be from the academic world 
or from the arena of public affairs; they 
may be poets or artists. Sometimes a 
concert replaces a lecture.
The lecture is followed by a discussion. 
Here the lecturers submit themselves to 
prolonged questioning by the students, 
with the faculty participating. Often the 
discussion turns into a seminar. Thus, 
the formal lecture serves two purposes: 
It inculcates in the students the habit of 
listening and following the exposition of 
a subject they may not be familiar with, 
and it also provides them an opportuni-
ty, in the discussion period, to exercise 
their dialectical skills in a setting very 
different from the classroom. It is here 
that they can test the degree of their 
understanding and the applicability of 
what they have learned. 
The lectures range through a variety of 
subjects. Sometimes the students are 
confronted with opposing views on a 
given subject. Some of the lectures have 
immediate repercussions in the semi-
nars and tutorials. 
14
LECTURES AND CONCERTS 
The following list provides some  
examples of lectures and concerts 
given on one or the other campus in 
recent years: 
“Reading, Writing, Listening, Talking”  
Eva Brann
“Recognizing Odysseus” 
Margaret Kirby 
“Aristotle and the Politics of Life: Equality 
and Citizenship in the Aristotelian Polis” 
Walter Brogan
“What was the Purpose of Archimedes’  
‘Floating Bodies’?” 
Reviel Netz
“In the Wilderness: Moses as Founder  
and Lawgiver” 
Ronna Burger
“Maimonides’s Guide for the Perplexed:  
its Genre and its Three Great Themes” 
Joshua Parens
“The Swine and the Chatterbox:  
Wittgenstein and Augustine on Talking  
(and Not Talking) About” 
Caleb Thompson
“Augustine on Talking (and Not Talking) 
About Freedom, Meditation, and (No-) 
Self-Control in the Pāli Nikāyas” 
Karin Meyers
“Deadly Virtue: Shakespeare’s Macbeth” 
Jan Blits
“Songs of Shakespeare” 
Folger Consort
“The Science of Forgetfulness: Philosophy 
and Tradition in the Essays of Montaigne” 
Ann Hartle
“Rousseau’s Chemical Apprenticeship” 
Christopher J. Kelly
“On The Volunteer” 
Salvatore Scibona
“On Some Silences in Beethoven’s  
Piano Sonatas”  
Fawn Trigg
“Abraham Lincoln and the Daughters of Dred 
Scott: A Reflection on the Declaration of 
Independence” 
Diana Schaub
“At the Crossroads of the Cave: Plato and 
Heidegger on History and Nihilism” 
Gregory Fried
“Subjective Sensory Experience and the 
Fallacy of Neural Codes” 
Leslie Kay
“August Wilson’s King Hedley II:   
An American Oedipus?” 
Nicole Jerr
“Brick by Brick: Changing America  
Through Song” 
Dashon Burton, baritone
15
Freshman Y ear
*Homer  Iliad, Odyssey
*Aeschylus  Agamemnon, Libation Bearers, Eumenides,  
 Prometheus B ound
*Sophocles  Oedipus Rex, Oedipus at Colonus, Antigone, Philoctetes, 
 Ajax
*Thucydides  Peloponnesian War
*Euripides  Hippolytus, Bacchae
*Herodotus  Histories
*Aristophanes Clouds
Sappho Selected poems  
*Plato Meno, Gorgias, Republic, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, 
 Symposium, Parmenides , Theaetetus, Sophist, 
 Timaeus, Phaedrus
*Aristotle Poetics, Physics, Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, On   
 Generation and Corruption , Politics, Parts of Animals, 
 Generation of Animals
Euclid Elements
*Lucretius  On the Nature of Things
*Plutarch Lycurgus, Solon 
Ptolemy  Almagest
Pascal Treatise on the Equilibrium of Liquids
Nicomachus Arithmetic
Lavoisier Elements of Chemistry
Harvey Motion of the Heart and Blood
Essays by Archimedes, F ahrenheit, Avogadro, Dalton, Cannizzaro, 
 Virchow , Mariotte, Driesch, Gay-Lussac, Spemann, Stears, 
 J.J. Thomson, Mendele yev, Berthollet, J.L. Proust
ST . JOHN’S LIST OF GREAT BOOKS 
The list of books that serves as the core of the curriculum had its beginnings at  
Columbia College, at the University of Chicago, and at the University of Virginia. 
Since 1937, it has been under continuous review at St. John’s College. The dis-
tribution of the books over the four years is significant. More than 2,000 years of 
intellectual history form the background of the first two years; about 300 years of 
history form the background for almost twice as many authors in the last two years.
The first year is devoted to Greek authors and their pioneering understanding of 
the liberal arts; the second year ranges from the Hebrew Bible to the 16th century 
seeds of modernity; the third year has books of the 17th and 18th centuries; the 
fourth year brings the reading into the 19th and 20th centuries.
The chronological order in which the books are read is primarily a matter of con-
venience and intelligibility; it does not imply a historical approach to the subject 
matter. The St. John’s curriculum seeks to convey to students an understanding of 
the fundamental problems that human beings have to face today and at all times. It 
invites them to reflect both on their continuities and their discontinuities.
The list of books that constitute the core of the St. John’s Program is subject to yearly 
review by the Instruction Committee of the faculty. Those listed here are read at one 
or both campuses, not always in their entirety.
16
Monteverdi L’Orfeo
Stravinsky  Symphony of Psalms
Junior Y ear
*Cervantes  Don Quixote 
Galileo  Two New Sciences 
*Hobbes Leviathan 
*Descartes Meditations, Rules for the Direction of the Mind
*Milton  Paradise Lost
La Rochefoucauld Maximes
Madame de Lafayette La Princesse de Clèves
La Fontaine  Fables 
*Pascal  Pensées 
Huygens  Treatise on Light, On the Mo vement of Bodies by Impact 
*Eliot Middlemarch
*Spinoza  Theologico-Political Treatise, Ethics
*Locke  Second Treatise of Government 
Racine Phèdre 
Newton  Principia Mathematica 
*Leibniz Monadology, Discourse on Metaphysics, Essay on 
 Dynamics, Principles o f Nature and Grace 
*Swift  Gulliver’s Travels 
*Hume  Treatise of Human Nature 
*Rousseau Social Contract, The Origin of Inequality
*Molière Le Misanthrope
Sophomore Y ear    
*Hebrew Bible
*New Testament
*Aristotle De Anima, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics, Categories
Apollonius  Conics
*Virgil Aeneid
*Plutarch Caesar, Cato the Younger, Antony, Brutus 
*Epictetus  Discourses, Manual
*Tacitus Annals
Ptolemy  Almagest
*Plotinus  The Enneads
*Augustine  Confessions
*Maimonides Guide for the Perplexed
*Anselm  Proslogium
*Aquinas Summa Theologiae
*Dante Divine Comedy
*Chaucer  Canterbury Tales
*Machiavelli  The Prince, Discourses
Copernicus On the Revolutions of the Spheres
Kepler Astronomia Nova
Livy Early History of Rome
Palestrina Missa Papae Marcelli
*Montaigne Essays
Viète Introduction to the Analytical Art
*Bacon Novum Organum
*Shakespeare Richard II, Henry IV, The Tempest, As You Like It, 
 Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth , King Lear, and Sonnets
Poems by  Marvel l, Donne, and other 16th- and 17th-century poets
Descartes  Geometry, *Discourse on Method
Pascal  Generation of Conic Sections
Bach  St. Matthew Passion, Inventions
Haydn  Quartets
Mozart  Operas
Beethoven  Third Symphony
Schubert  Songs
17
*Adam Smith  Wealth of Nations
*Kant Critique of Pure Reason, Foundations of the Metaphysics 
 o f Morals
*Mozart Don Giovanni 
*Austen  Pride and Prejudice, Emma
Hawthorne The Scarlett Letter
Dedekind Essays on the Theory of Numbers
American Founding *Articles of Confederation, *Declaration of Independence,
Documents *Cons titution of the United States of America
*Hamilton, Jay & Madison T he Federalist
*Twain The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
*Wordsworth The Two Part Prelude of 1799
Essays by Y oung, Taylor, Euler, D. Bernoulli, Ørsted, Ampère,
 F araday, Maxwell
Senior Y ear
*Supreme Court Opinions
*Goethe Faust
Darwin  Origin of Species 
*Hegel Phenomenology of Spirit
Lobachevsky  Theory of Parallels 
*Plato Phaedrus
*Tocqueville Democracy in America, Documents from American History
*Lincoln  Select ed speeches 
*F. Douglass Select ed speeches
*Kierkegaard  Philosophical Fragments, Fear and Trembling 
*Wagner  Tristan and Isolde 
*Marx Capital, Political and Economic Manuscripts of 1844,  
 The German Ideolog y 
*Dostoevsky  Brothers Karamazov 
*Tolstoy  War and Peace 
*Melville Benito Cereno
*O’Connor “ Good Country People”
*Nietzsche Beyond Good and Evil 
*Freud  Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, Mourning and 
 Melancholia , Beyond the Pleasure Principle 
Baudelaire Les Fleurs du Mal
*Booker T. Washington Select ed writings
*Du Bois The Souls of Black Folk
*Husserl Crisis of the European Sciences
*Heidegger The Word of Nietzsche, God is Dead, Introduction  
 t o Metaphysics 
*Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex 
Einstein Select ed papers 
*Conrad  Heart of Darkness 
*Faulkner Go Down Moses
Flaubert Un Coeur Simple
*Woolf Mrs. Dalloway, To the Lighthouse
*Baldwin The Fir e Next Time
Poems by Emil y Dickinson, Yeats, T. S. Eliot, Wallace
 St evens, Valéry, Rimbaud, Elizabeth Bishop
Essays by F araday, J. J. Thomson, Millikan, Minkowski, Rutherford,  
 Da visson, Schrödinger, Bohr, de Broglie, Heisenberg, 
 Mendel , Boveri, Sutton, Morgan, Beadle & Tatum, 
 Sus sman, Watson & Crick, Jacob & Monod, Hardy
* For these authors, one or more of their books are read in seminar. Other authors are read in the tutorials and 
laboratory. 
18
ST . JOHN’S LIST OF AUTHORS AND TEXTS
Classification of authors, according to conventional subject matter, through the four years.
   PHILOSOPHY
AND THEOLOGY 
 HISTORY AND MATHEMATICS AND 
 LITERATURE  SOCIAL SCIENCE NATURAL SCIENCE  MUSIC  
Freshman  
Ye a r  
Homer  Plato Herodotus Euclid Mariotte
Aeschylus  Aristotle  Thucydides Nicomachus Gay-Lussac
 Sophocles   Lucretius  Plutarch Ptolemy Proust
 Euripides     Lavoisier Cannizzaro
 Aristophanes    Dalton Berthollet
     Archimedes Mendeleyev
     Pascal J. J. Thomson
     Fahrenheit Harvey
     Avogadro Driesch
     Virchow Spemann
Sophomore 
Ye a r  
Virgil  Aristotle  Plutarch Ptolemy  Palestrina
Dante  Epictetus  Tacitus Apollonius  Bach
 Chaucer   Plotinus  Livy Copernicus  Mozart
 Shakespeare   Hebrew Bible Machiavelli Viète  Beethov en
 Donne   Augustine  Descartes  Schubert
 Marvell   Anselm  Pascal  Stravinsky
   Aquinas   Kepler  Haydn
   Luther    Des Prez
   Montaigne    Monteverdi
   Bacon
   Maimonides
   
Junior
Ye a r 
 Cervantes  Descartes Locke Galileo Dedekind Mo zart
Milton  Pascal Rousseau Young D . Bernoulli
 Swift  Hobbes Adam Smith Euler Faraday
 Racine  Spinoza Hamilton, Jay, T aylor Maxwell
 La Fontaine  Locke     Madison  Newton Ørst ed
 J. Austen  Leibniz  Leibniz Ampère
 La Rochefoucauld Hume      Huygens 
 G. Eliot  Kant       
 Molière   
 Wordsworth
 Twain 
Senior  
Y ear  
Tolstoy Woolf Hegel Hegel Farada y Mendel Wagner
Dostoevsky O’Connor Kierkegaard Marx Lobachevsky J . J. Thomson
 Goethe E. Bishop Nietzsche Documents  Rutherford  Bohr
 Flaubert Faulkner Heidegger     from American Minkow ski Millikan 
 Baudelaire W. Stevens Husserl     political history Da visson Schrödinger
 Rimbaud T. S. Eliot Wittgenstein Tocqueville  de Broglie Darwin
 Valéry  de Beauvoir Lincoln Beadle & Tatum F reud
 Melville  Plato F. Douglass Bov eri Einstein
 Dickinson       B. Washingt on Sutton Heisenberg
 Yeats   Du Bois Morgan  Dirac 
 Conrad   Hamilton, Jay , Sussman Watson & Crick
 Kafka      Madison Hardy Jac ob & Monod
 Woolf       
    
 
 
  
19
ST . JOHN’S LIST OF AUTHORS AND TEXTS
Classification of authors, according to conventional subject matter, through the four years.
   PHILOSOPHY HISTORY AND
SOCIAL SCIENCE 
 MATHEMATICS AND 
NATURAL SCIENCE   LITERATURE  AND THEOLOGY MUSIC  
Freshman  Homer  Plato Herodotus Euclid Mariotte
Ye a r  Aeschylus  Aristotle  Thucydides Nicomachus Gay-Lussac
 Sophocles   Lucretius  Plutarch Ptolemy Proust
 Euripides     Lavoisier Cannizzaro
 Aristophanes    Dalton Berthollet
     Archimedes Mendeleyev
     Pascal J. J. Thomson
     Fahrenheit Harvey
     Avogadro Driesch
     Virchow Spemann
Sophomore Virgil  Aristotle  Plutarch Ptolemy  Palestrina
Ye a r  Dante  Epictetus  Tacitus Apollonius  Bach
 Chaucer   Plotinus  Livy Copernicus  Mozart
 Shakespeare   Hebrew Bible Machiavelli Viète  Beethoven
 Donne   Augustine  Descartes  Schubert
 Marvell   Anselm  Pascal  Stravinsky
   Aquinas   Kepler  Haydn
   Luther    Des Prez
   Montaigne    Monteverdi
   Bacon
   Maimonides
   
Junior Cervantes  Descartes Locke Galileo Dedekind Mozart
Ye a r Milton  Pascal Rousseau Young D. Bernoulli
 Swift  Hobbes Adam Smith Euler Faraday
 Racine  Spinoza Hamilton, Jay,
    Madison  
 Taylor Maxwell
 La Fontaine  Locke Newton Ørsted
 J. Austen  Leibniz  Leibniz Ampère
 La Rochefoucauld Hume      Huygens 
 G. Eliot  Kant       
 Molière   
 Wordsworth
 Twain 
Senior  Tolstoy Woolf Hegel Hegel  Faraday  Mendel  Wagner
Y ear  Dostoevsky O’Connor Kierkegaard Marx  Lobachevsky  J. J. Thomson
 Goethe E. Bishop Nietzsche Documents  
    from American 
    political history
Rutherford  Bohr
 Flaubert Faulkner Heidegger Minkowski  Millikan  
 Baudelaire W. Stevens Husserl  Davisson  Schrödinger
 Rimbaud T. S. Eliot Wittgenstein Tocqueville  de Broglie  Darwin
 Valéry  de Beauvoir Lincoln  Beadle & Tatum  Freud
 Melville  Plato F. Douglass  Boveri  Einstein
 Dickinson       B. Washington  Sutton  Heisenberg
 Yeats   Du Bois  Morgan  Dirac  
 Conrad   Hamilton, Jay, 
   Madison 
Sussman  Watson & Crick
 Kafka   Hardy  Jacob & Monod
 Woolf       
    
 
 
  
20
THE TUTORS 
At St. John’s, the teaching members 
of the faculty are called tutors. The 
title “professor” is avoided to signify 
that it is not the chief role of the tutors 
to expound doctrines in their field 
of expertise. Instead, learning is a 
cooperative enterprise carried out in 
small groups with persons at different 
stages of learning working together. All 
participants in a class are expected to 
prepare for their discussion by studying 
the text that is the principal teacher of 
the class—it might be Plato or Newton or 
Jane Austen or one of the other authors 
who wrote from the high point of their 
learning.
What then is the role of the reading and 
talking teachers, the tutors? First of all, 
they should be good questioners, able to 
raise important issues that will engage 
the intellectual and imaginative powers 
of their students. Next, they must be 
good listeners, able to determine the 
difficulties of their students and to help 
them to reformulate their observa-
tions and examine their opinions. The 
tutors should be ready to supply helpful 
examples and to encourage students to 
examine the implications of their first 
attempts at understanding. In summa-
ry, the role of the tutors is to question, 
to listen, and to help. The help might 
take the form of translation, experimen-
tation, demonstration, or explanation, 
but first of all the tutor will call on the 
students to try to help themselves.
In order that conversations at St. John’s 
will not be limited to what fits neatly 
inside a single discipline, it is essential 
that St. John’s tutors re-educate them-
selves to acquire increased understand-
ing in those parts of the Program that 
are outside their field of post-graduate 
training. For example, tutors with ad-
vanced degrees in mathematics would 
prepare themselves to lead language 
tutorials requiring translations from 
Sophocles or Racine. The advantage of 
this for students is that they are under 
the guidance of active learners who will 
not avert their far-ranging questions 
with the reply that these matters are 
handled in another department. The 
advantage of this for tutors is that they 
are involved with a variety of works of 
such richness that they are continually 
tempted to strive for greater compre-
hension of them. Some tutors do find 
time to write articles and books, but 
their first duty is to prepare themselves 
to teach the St. John’s Program. This 
preparation is necessarily demanding 
because no full-time tutor is confined to 
a single part of the Program. They are, 
and have to be, teaching members of a 
seminar and of either two tutorials or 
of one tutorial and a laboratory section, 
and they are continually teaching their 
colleagues and learning from them.
It is important that tutors have time to 
probe more deeply into the foundations 
and wider contexts of what is studied 
at St. John’s than the preparation for 
classes usually allows. In order to avoid 
staleness and the ever-present danger 
of succumbing to routine performance, 
they are granted sabbatical leaves to 
allow for leisure and serious study. 
Between sabbatical leaves, faculty study 
groups are set up. Leaders of such 
groups are sometimes relieved of part 
of their ordinary teaching duties. The 
groups engage in a thorough study and 
exploration of a subject. The subject 
may not be directly related to the  
St. John’s curriculum, as the work of the 
study groups opens new perspectives 
for teaching and learning at St. John’s.
A committee of tutors, the Instruction 
Committee, is responsible for advising 
the deans on all matters of instruction 
21
and advising the presidents on appoint-
ments to the faculty. The committee 
consists of the deans and 12 tutors, six 
elected by the tutors on each campus 
of the college; the presidents sit with 
the Instruction Committee ex officio. 
The members of the committee on 
each campus constitute the Instruction 
Committee for that campus and meet 
regularly throughout the year. The full 
committee meets annually.
SCHEDULES
Perhaps the most distinctive mark of 
St. John’s College is the fact that all the 
students of the same year are reading 
the same books at the same time with 
the same immediate preparation. This 
may be the week when all freshmen 
are learning the Greek alphabet; or 
the weeks when they are meeting the 
highest type of Greek mathematics in 
the fifth book of Euclid’s Elements; or the 
time of the first assignment in Thucy-
dides, when students and seminar lead-
ers are thinking about the implications 
for liberty in Pericles’ funeral oration. 
Thus all students, having a common 
program of study, have a common 
ground for conversation.
The general schedule is the same for all 
students. The language, mathematics, 
and music tutorials each meet for three-
and-one-half hours to four-and-one-
half hours per week. Freshmen, juniors, 
and seniors spend up to six hours each 
week in the laboratory. Each week there 
are two evening seminars, lasting two 
hours or more. A formal lecture or 
concert is given once a week. Sixteen to 
19 hours per week are spent in regular 
classes. The year is divided into two 
semesters of 16 weeks each.
A Sample Freshman Schedule, Annapolis
HOUR MONDAY TUESDAY WEDNESDAY THURSDAY FRIDAY 
9-10:10 a.m. Language  Language  Music Language
10:20-11:30 a.m.  Mathematics Mathematics  Mathematics
1-3:40 p.m. Laboratory   Laboratory
8-10 p.m. Seminar   Seminar Formal Lecture
A Sample Freshman Schedule, Santa Fe
HOUR MONDAY TUESDA Y WEDNESDAY THURSDAY FRIDAY 
9-10:30 a.m. Mathematics  Mathematics   Mathematics
10:30 a.m.-12 p.m. Music Language Lang uage Language
1:30-4:30 p.m.  Laboratory  Laboratory 
7:30-9:30 p.m. Seminar   Seminar Formal Lecture
22
ESSA YS AND EXAMINATIONS
Annually in Annapolis and each semes-
ter in Santa Fe, all freshmen, sopho-
mores, and juniors submit essays to 
their seminar leaders on some aspect of 
the liberal arts. These essays are based 
directly upon books in the Program.
Oral Examinations
Toward the end of each semester, oral 
examinations are conducted for each 
student by the seminar leaders. The 
students are questioned freely and 
informally on the texts they have read or 
the paper they have written and on their 
critical and interpretive opinions. It is 
not the principal aim of the examiners to 
find out how much students remember. 
Students are encouraged to consider the 
different parts of their study in relation 
to each other and to problems that may 
not have been treated in any of their 
classes. For freshmen, the first oral 
examination of the year is given before 
the winter vacation, and for juniors and 
seniors, just before preceptorials begin.
The Algebra Examination
Before the second semester of their 
sophomore year, students must pass an 
examination in elementary algebra and 
trigonometry. Review sessions  
are offered.
The Final Essay and  
Oral Examination
In the senior year, the student is re-
quired to present to the faculty a final 
essay related to some aspect of the four 
years’ work. It is not intended to be a 
piece of specialized research, but rather 
a sustained performance in the liberal 
arts. Four weeks at the start of the 
second semester are reserved for essay 
writing; during this period, seniors are 
relieved of classes. If the final essay is 
approved by the faculty committee to 
which it has been assigned for reading, 
the student is examined about it by the 
committee in an hour-long public ex-
amination. No degree is awarded unless 
both the essay and the oral examination 
are satisfactory. The senior essay is re-
garded as a culmination of the student’s 
learning.
ACADEMIC STANDING
Because St. John’s classes are small and 
intimate, and because students partic-
ipate actively, tutors are aware of their 
students’ progress from day to day. The 
tutors’ appraisals of a student are based 
on the student’s total performance as a 
member of the tutorials and seminar.
It is assumed that each student has 
the required capacities to pursue this 
course of study until there is clear 
evidence to the contrary. The curricu-
lum is varied and rich enough for great 
diversity of interest, performance, and 
achievement, and there is ample room 
within it for a wide range of ability and 
for individual choice and guidance. 
Moreover, St. John’s is free from the 
pressures of conventional examinations 
and competition for grades.
Because student participation is es-
sential to the way in which classes are 
conducted at St. John’s, attendance at all 
regularly scheduled college exercises is 
required. A record of absences is kept. 
This record is taken into consideration 
whenever there is occasion to deter-
mine academic standing.
The Don Rag
Within the college, the most important 
form of evaluation is the don rag. Once 
a semester, freshmen, sophomores, and 
juniors meet with their tutors in the don 
rag. The tutors report to one of the semi-
23
nar leaders on the students’ work during 
the semester; the students are then invit-
ed to respond to their tutors’ reports and 
comment on their own work. Advice may 
be requested and given, difficulties may 
be aired, but grades are not reported or 
discussed.
In the junior year, conferences replace 
some of the don rags. In conferences, 
students report on their own work, 
and then the tutors comment on that 
report. By the time students are seniors, 
it is assumed that they can evaluate 
their own work, and there is no don rag 
unless a tutor believes that there is a 
special need for one.
If a student’s work as a whole falls below 
a satisfactory level, the student may 
be placed on academic probation, with 
the stipulation of conditions that must 
be met if the student is to continue in 
the college. The normal probationary 
period is one semester. 
Letter Grades
Students are encouraged not to work 
for grades, but to develop their powers 
of understanding. Therefore, within the 
college, grading is not of central impor-
tance. Students are told their grades only 
on request. The tutor’s comprehensive 
judgment of a student is reported to the 
dean each semester as a conventional 
letter grade, A, B, C, D or F, where C in-
dicates that the work is at a satisfactory 
level. Such a grading system is necessary 
for students who wish to enter graduate 
or professional school, or to transfer to 
another college. 
Sophomore Enabling
Sophomore enabling is a review by the 
Instruction Committee—with the advice 
of all the tutors of sophomores—of the 
student’s learning during the two years 
spent in the college. The sophomore 
essay is especially important in the 
enabling procedure. Consequently, no 
students are enabled to enter the junior 
class unless they have written a satis-
factory essay, and then only if in the 
judgment of the Instruction Committee 
they are sufficiently prepared for the 
work of the final two years. In particu-
lar, the enabling judgment looks to the 
possibility of the student writing an 
acceptable senior essay.
24
THE ST . JOHN’S DEGREE
Bachelor of Arts
The student who completes the four-year curriculum satisfactorily is awarded the  
degree of Bachelor of Arts. Students who enter in the January session graduate in 
three and one-half years, and they spend their first summer completing their  
freshman year, so that they, too, complete a four-year curriculum. On the transcript,  
St. John’s seminars, tutorials, and laboratories are translated into terms of  
conventional subjects. The curriculum is the equivalent of approximately 136  
semester hours. 
UNDERGRADUATE COURSES AND CREDITS                                             
FRESHMAN
Freshman Laboratory 1 or 2 4 cr edits
Freshman Language Tutorial 1 or 2 4 cr edits
Freshman Mathematics Tutorial 1 or 2 4 cr edits
Freshman Music Tutorial 1 or 2 1 cr edit
Freshman Seminar 1 or 2 4 cr edits
Freshman Annual Essay  .50 cr edit
SOPHOMORE
Sophomore Music Tutorial 1 or 2 5 cr edits
Sophomore Language Tutorial 1 or 2  4 cr edits
Sophomore Mathematics Tutorial 1 or 2  4 cr edits
Sophomore Seminar 1 or 2 4 cr edits
Sophomore Annual Essay  1 cr edit
JUNIOR
Junior Laboratory 1 or 2 5 cr edits
Junior Language Tutorial 1 or 2  4 cr edits
Junior Mathematics Tutorial 1 or 2  4 cr edits
Junior Seminar 1 2 cr edits
Junior Seminar 2 4 cr edits
Junior Preceptorial 2 cr edits
Junior Annual Essay 1 cr edit
SENIOR
Senior Laboratory 1/2 4/3 cr edits
Senior Language Tutorial 1/2 4/3 cr edits
Senior Mathematics Tutorial 1/2 4/3 cr edits
Senior Seminar 1/2 2/3 cr edits
Senior Preceptorial  2 cr edits
Senior Essay 3.5 cr edits
25
THE GRADUATE INSTITUTE IN 
LIBERAL EDUCATION
The Graduate Institute at St. John’s 
College offers a Master of Arts in Liberal 
Arts on both campuses and a Master of 
Arts in Eastern Classics on the Santa Fe 
campus. These programs, inspired by 
that of the undergraduate college, have 
two distinctive features: The curriculum 
consists exclusively of classic or great 
books used as texts, and all classes are 
conducted as small group discussions. 
Applications are encouraged from 
adults with diverse educational and 
cultural backgrounds and with varied 
interests and professions.
DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS IN 
LIBERAL ARTS 
The aim of the program is to help 
students formulate and respond to 
fundamental questions about them-
selves and their world by reading and 
discussing with others the great books 
of the Western tradition. The readings 
are organized into five segments: Liter-
ature, Politics and Society, Philosophy 
and Theology, Mathematics and Natural 
Science, and History. Students must 
complete four of these five segments 
to earn the Master of Arts in Liberal 
Arts degree (36 semester credit hours). 
These segments taken together consti-
tute a closely integrated program  
of study. 
Classes are small and based on dis-
cussion of classic texts, but differ in 
significant ways. The heart of the curric-
ulum is the seminar, in which 14 to 19 
students engage in a discussion initiated 
by a tutor’s question about the assigned 
reading. In the tutorial, a slightly smaller 
group of students focuses more inten-
sively on smaller assignments—either 
mathematical proofs, short literary texts, 
or dense arguments of philosophy or 
political theory. The preceptorial, with 
an even smaller number of students, 
engages in the study of a single book or 
topic and requires that students write 
a substantial paper. Faculty members, 
called tutors, lead classes by posing 
questions and guiding the discussion, 
rather than by lecturing in their field  
of expertise.
At least two segments are offered in 
the 16-week fall and spring terms, and 
usually two to four are offered in the 
eight-week summer term. In the fall 
and spring terms, classes meet only 
two days a week, in the late afternoons 
and evenings, making it possible for 
students who work to participate. 
During the summer, classes meet five 
days a week and start earlier in the day. 
Schedules vary somewhat between the 
two campuses. Students may matricu-
late in any of the three terms, and take 
segments in any order compatible with 
the sequence of offerings. An option-
al master’s essay may be written by 
students who have completed at least 
two terms. 
26
THE LIBERAL ARTS CURRICULUM**
Literature
SEMINAR
Homer Iliad, Odyssey 
Aeschylus Agamemnon, Libation Bearers, Eumenides
Sophocles Oedipus Rex, Oedipus at Colonus, Antigone 
Euripides Hippolytus, Bacchae, Electra
Aristophanes Frogs
TUTORIAL
Chaucer Canterbury Tales in Middle English*
Shakespeare King Lear
Aristotle Poetics
Selected English lyric poetry
Politics and Society
SEMINAR
Plutarch Lycurgus, Solon
Plato Republic
Aristotle Politics*
Machiavelli The Prince
Locke Second Treatise of Civil Government 
Rousseau On the Origin and Foundations of Inequality 
Marx The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts  
 o f 1844* 
Tocqueville Democracy in America* 
TUTORIAL
Aristotle Nicomachean Ethics*
Thomas Aquinas Treatise on Law*
Hobbes Leviathan*
American Founding Documents Declaration of Independence 
 Ar ticles of Confederation
 U .S. Constitution
Hamilton, Jay, and Madison The Federalist*
Selected U.S. Supreme Court
Decisions
Mathematics and Natural Science 
SEMINAR
Plato Timaeus* 
Lucretius On the Nature of Things 
Aristotle Physics*
Ptolemy Almagest*
Galileo Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems*
Darwin The Origin of Species*
Freud Selected Works
TUTORIAL
Euclid Elements* 
Lobachevski The Theory of Parallels*
Philosophy and Theology 
SEMINAR
 Genesis 
 Exodus 
 Job
 Matthew 
 Romans 
Augustine Confessions* 
27
Thomas Aquinas Summa Theologica* 
Kant Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals 
Kierkegaard Philosophical Fragments
TUTORIAL
Plato Meno 
Aristotle Metaphysics*
Descartes Meditations 
Hume An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding 
Kant Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics 
Nietzsche Beyond Good and Evil*
History 
SEMINAR
Herodotus Histories*
Thucydides Peloponnesian War*
Livy Early History of Rome*
Polybius Histories*
Plutarch Caesar, Cato the Younger
Tacitus Annals*
Tocqueville The Old Regime and the French Revolution*
TUTORIAL
Augustine The City of God*
Vico The New Science*
Kant Idea of a Universal History
Herder Ideas Toward the Philosophy of the History  
 of Mankind*
Hegel Philosophy of History*
Marx The German Ideology
Nietzsche Uses and Abuses of History for Life
Dilthey Introduction to the Human Sciences*
Collingwood The Idea of History*
Strauss Political Philosophy and History*
PRECEPTORIAL
(sample offerings)
Aristotle On the Soul
Confucius Analects
Virgil Aeneid
Cervantes Don Quixote
Machiavelli The Florentine Histories
Galileo Two New Sciences
Spinoza Ethics
Montesquieu The Spirit of the Laws
Smith The Wealth of Nations
Theory of Light Arist otle, Descartes, Huygens, and Newton
Rousseau Emile
Lavoisier Elements of Chemistry
Austen Emma
Hegel The Philosophy of Right
Maxwell Theory of Heat
Eliot Middlemarch
Dostoevski The Brothers Karamazov
Joyce Ulysses
Wittgenstein Philosophical Investigations
Arendt The Origins of Totalitarianism
Selected poems of  
Emily Dickinson
**Readings may differ slightly between campuses
28
DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS 
IN EASTERN CLASSICS  
The aim of the Eastern Classics program is to help students seek a deeper under-
standing of the fundamental and enduring questions that have been raised by 
thoughtful human beings in the rich traditions of the East. Its course of study con-
sists of 34 semester credit hours, completed in one calendar year, beginning in the 
fall and concluding in the summer. It is offered only on the Santa Fe campus.
The program includes a series of seminars, preceptorials, and a language tutorial. 
In the seminar, 14 to 18 students discuss assigned readings from a wide range of 
Indian, Chinese, and Japanese texts. In the tutorial, students study either Sanskrit or 
classical Chinese. The goal is not mastery, but rather sufficient familiarity with the 
elements of the languages to gain some insight into their structure and to translate 
selected short passages from classical texts. In the preceptorial, students study a 
single work or theme for an eight-week period. Each student is required to write a 
substantial paper. As in the other programs, tutors lead classes by posing questions 
and guiding the discussion, rather than by lecturing in their field of expertise.
Classes meet in late afternoons and evenings to accommodate students who work 
part-time, but due to the intensive nature of the program, full-time work is not  
encouraged.
THE EASTERN CLASSICS CURRICULUM
Fall Semester
CHINESE TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
Pronunciation & grammar
Confucius Analects*
Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching*
SANSKRIT TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
Gonda  A Concise Elementary Grammar of the 
 Sanskrit L anguage
Devanagari script
SEMINAR
Lao Tzu Tao Te Ching
Confucius Analects, The Great Learning and The Doctrine  
 o f the Mean
Mo Tzu Basic Writings of Mo Tzu*
Chuang Tzu Basic Writings
Mencius Works*
Hsün Tzu Writings of Hsün Tzu*
Han Fei Tzu Writings of Han Fei Tzu*
Sima Qian The Grand Scribe’s Records*
I Ching
Rig Veda
Brhadaranyaka Upanishad
Kena Upanishad
Mundaka Upanishad
Katha Upanishad
Ishvara Krishna Sankhya Karika, Tattva-Kaumudi*
Patanjali Yoga Sutra
29
Jayadeva Gitagovinda
PRECEPTORIAL 
(sample offerings)
 Mahabharata (required)
 I Ching (sample offerings)
Confucius Analects
Chuang Tzu Basic Writings
Lao Tzu Basic Writings
Spring Semester
CHINESE TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
 T ’ang Poetry
Mencius Works*
SANSKRIT TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
 Bhagavad-Gita*
Nagarjuna:  Madhyamika-shastra*
SEMINAR
Kalidasa Shakuntala, Kumarasambhava and Meghaduta 
Jaimini Mimamsa Sutra*
Kumarila Bhatta Shlokavartika, Katha Upanishad, Institutes of Manu
 K autilya: Artha-Shastra, Kama Sutra*, Mahabharata
 Bhagavad-Gita
Abhinavagupta  Dhvanyaloka*
Jayarasi Bhatta  Tattvopaplavasimha*
Ashvaghosha Buddhacarita, Majjhima Nikaya*, Vimalakirti Sutra*
Nagarjuna: Madhyamika-shastra
Chandrakirti Prasannapada, Lankavatara Sutra*
Guadapada The Great Karika on the Mandukya Upanishad
Shankara Commentary on the Vedanta Sutras
T’ao Ch’ien Record of the Peach Blossom Fountainhead
 Chinese P oetry*, Diamond Sutra, Heart Sutra
Hui-Neng Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
Chu Hsi Chu Tzu, ch’uan-shu, Chu Tzu wen-chi
PRECEPTORIAL 
(sample offerings)
 Rig Veda
 Upanishads
Ts’ao Hsüeh-Ch’in Story of the Stone
Sima Qian The Grand Scribe’s Records
Neo-Confucian Texts
Chinese Vernacular Prose of the  
Ming Dynasty
Summer Semester
SEMINAR
 The Tale of the Heike, Lotus Sutra
Sei Shonagon The Pillow Book*
Kenko Essays in Idleness
Dogen Shobogenzo*
Basho The Narrow Road to the Deep North
Chushingura The Treasury of Loyal Retainers
PRECEPTORIAL 
(sample offerings)
Murasaki Shikibu The Tale of Genji (required)
*selections
30
DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS IN  
MIDDLE EASTERN CLASSICS  
The Master of Arts in Middle Eastern Classics is a one-year graduate program on 
the Santa Fe campus, focusing on the philosophical, literary, and spiritual legacies 
of the Jewish and Islamic traditions. As with all programs at St. John’s, it centers on 
close readings of original texts in English translation, discussed in small, collegial 
seminars and preceptorials. Supporting this interpretive work, students undertake 
intensive study of either Classical Hebrew or Classical Arabic, gaining attentiveness 
and respect for these texts in their original languages.
The seminar and preceptorial span three semesters, with the language tutorial in  
the fall and spring. The fall semester introduces foundational scriptures and Greek 
philosophical texts central to Jewish and Islamic philosophy. The fall and spring  
semesters also trace the development of mystical thought in Arabic and Persian prose 
and poetry. In the summer seminar, students explore the convergence of philosophy 
and mysticism, as well as history and philosophy. The summer semester affords  
students the opportunity to pursue specific interests in an elective preceptorial.
The MAMEC program complements the Western tradition studied in the under-
graduate and Graduate Institute Master of Arts in Liberal Arts curricula. It deepens 
engagement with the enduring conversation among Greek, Jewish, Christian, and 
Islamic traditions.
In keeping with the aims of liberal education, the program honors the coherence 
and intellectual dignity of these traditions. Students approach seminal texts not as 
artifacts, but as living inquiries. Emerging from the program, they gain a broadened 
sense of human possibility and a deeper capacity for thoughtful, open inquiry.
THE MIDDLE EASTERN CLASSICS CURRICULUM
 
Fall Semester
ARABIC TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
W.M. Thackston An Introduction to Koranic and Classical Arabic 
Alan Jones Arabic Through the Qur‘āni
HEBREW TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
Thomas Lambdin Introduction to Biblical Hebrew
SEMINAR
 The Epic of Gilgamesh
Hebrew Bible (Tanakh) Genesis, Exodus, Deuteronomy, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, 
 Psalms, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Jonah, Esther, and Job
Philo On the Creation 
 Talmud 
 Gospel of Matthew 
 Gospel of John 
Origen On First Principles 
Pseudo-Dionysius The Divine Names, The Mystical Theology 
 Mu‘allaqāt
31
At ̣̣̣ t ̣̣̣ ār Memorial of God’s Friends 
Mans ̣ ūr al- ̣ Hallāj poems
 Zohar  
Ibn Gabirol The Font of Life
Judah Halevi The Kuzari (selections) 
PRECEPTORIAL
Plato Timaeus, Laws 
Aristotle Physics, Metaphysics, On the Soul 
Plotinus Enneads 
 Qur’ān 
Ibn Ishāq The Life of Muhammad 
Spring Semester
ARABIC TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
W.M. Thackston An Introduction to Koranic and Classical Arabic 
Qur’ān
HEBREW TUTORIAL
(sample offerings)
Thomas Lambdin Introduction to Biblical Hebrew 
Genesis
SEMINAR 
‘Abd al-Jabbār Book of the Five Fundamentals 
al-Sanūsī Foundational Proofs 
Ibn Sīnā The Metaphysics of the Healing 
Ibn T ̣ ufayl H ̣ ayy ibn Yaqz ̣ ān 
al-Ghazālī Deliverance from Error, The Alchemy of Happiness,  
 The Incoherence of the Philosophers 
Ibn Rushd  The Decisive Treatise, The Incoherence of the Incoherence 
Ferdowsi Book of Kings 
Omar Khayyām Ruba’iyāt 
Niz ̣ āmī Layla and Majnūn
‘At ̣̣̣ t ̣̣̣ ār The Conference of the Birds 
Sa‘dī Gulistān 
Ibn al-Fārid ̣ The Wine Ode, Poem of the Sufi Way  
H ̣ āfiz ̣ poems 
PRECEPTORIAL
al-Fārābī The Enumeration of the Sciences, Introduction to  
 Summary of Plato’s Laws, The Book of Letters, The Book 
 of Religion, The Attainment of Happiness, The  
 Philosophy of Plato, The Philosophy of Aristotle 
Maimonides Guide of the Perplexed 
Ibn al-‘Arabī The Ringstones of Wisdom  
Rūmī Divān-i Shams-i Tabrīzi, Masnavī  
Summer Semester
SEMINAR 
Jahān Malek Khātūn poems 
Suhrawardī The Philosophy of Illumination (H ̣ ikmat al-ishrāq)
Mullā S ̣ adrā The Book of Metaphysical Penetrations
Ibn Khaldūn Muqaddimah  
PRECEPTORIAL
Elective options will be available 
Admissions Offices
60 COLLEGE AVENUE
ANNAPOLIS, MD 21401
800-727-9238
ANNAPOLIS.ADMISSIONS@SJC.EDU
1160 CAMINO DE CRUZ BLANCA
SANTA FE, NM 87505
800-331-5232
SANTAFE.ADMISSIONS@SJC.EDU
For information about admissions and financial aid, please visit sjc.edu.
ACCREDITATION
The Annapolis campus is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education (3624 Market 
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104; 267-284-5000; www.msche.org); the Santa Fe campus is accredited by the 
Higher Learning Commission (HLC; 230 South LaSalle St., Suite 7-500, Chicago, IL 60604; 312-621-7440; 
www.hlcommission.org). 
The Statement of the St. John’s Program and the provisions contained therein are not and may not be 
regarded as an express or implied contract between any person (including any current or perspective stu-
dent, faculty or staff member) and the college.  The Statement is for general informational purposes only.  
The College reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to change any provision of the Statement without 
notice.